By Kristy Siegfried | 4 March, 2022 Over 1 million refugees flee Ukraine in a week. Barely one week after the military conflict in Ukraine began, some 1.2 million people have fled the country in what UN High Commissioner for Refugees Filippo Grandi described as one of the most rapid movements of refugees he had seen in four decades. UNHCR has warned that the number of refugees could reach 4 million or more in the coming months, making it Europe’s largest refugee crisis this century. Most have fled to Poland, Hungary, Moldova, Romania, Slovakia, where they have been widely welcomed by governments and local communities. EU Interior Ministers agreed on Thursday to trigger the Temporary Protection Directive. Once implemented, it will provide Ukrainians and third country nationals with refugee or permanent residence status with immediate protection and access to housing and other benefits in the EU for up to one year, without needing to go through individual asylum procedures. If the conflict continues, or refugees cannot return safely, the status could be extended for up to three years. UNHCR welcomed the decision and called for its swift and broad application. Russia, Ukraine agree to set up humanitarian corridors. Russia and Ukraine agreed on Thursday on the need for humanitarian corridors to deliver aid to besieged Ukrainian cities, and to help civilians escape. They did not indicate when the safe corridors may be established. The two sides also agreed on the need to deliver medicines and food to places where the fiercest fighting is taking place. A growing number of people are being displaced inside the country while others are trapped in cities that are the target of relentless shelling and where supplies of food and medicine are becoming increasingly scarce. UNHCR welcomed news of the humanitarian corridors, noting that “millions of people now need safe passage and urgent life-saving humanitarian assistance”. UN climate change report warns of mounting harms to people and planet. UN scientists on Monday delivered a stark warning about the “grave and mounting threat” of climate change to both nature and humanity. The report by the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC) provides the most detailed look yet at the threats posed by a warming climate and concludes that nations are not doing enough to protect people from hazards such as flooding and droughts, let alone from the “dangerous and widespread disruptions” expected over the next two decades. UN Secretary-General António Guterres described the report as “an atlas of human suffering”, noting that “nearly half of humanity is living in the danger zone – now”. The IPCC’s scientists found that climate and weather extremes are already contributing to humanitarian crises and driving displacement of people in all regions of the world. More people will be forced to flee as weather extremes intensify. The 4,000-page report identifies ways to adapt to climate change but warns that options for adaptation will become “increasingly limited” unless nations act quickly to slash fossil fuel emissions and halt global warming. Key clauses of UK’s immigration bill voted down by House of Lords. Policy proposals central to the UK government’s Nationality and Borders Bill were voted down in the House of Lords this week, removing clauses that would penalize and criminalize asylum seekers who arrive in the UK through an irregular route, such as by a small boat across the Channel. UNHCR has warned that the policy would create a two-tiered approach to asylum that would undermine international refugee protection rules. Other changes made by peers this week included the removal of a clause giving ministers the power to strip British citizenship without notice, a restriction on the ability of the UK to authorize push-backs at sea, and the removal of asylum “offshoring” powers that would have allowed asylum seekers to be transferred to a third country for processing. The Bill concludes its scrutiny in the House of Lords in the coming weeks, before returning to the House of Commons, where MPs must vote on whether to accept the changes or challenge them. World Bank approves US$1 billion to fund urgent needs in Afghanistan. The executive board of the World Bank on Tuesday approved a plan to use more than US$1 billion from a frozen Afghanistan trust fund to finance urgently needed education, agriculture and health programmes. The money, to be disbursed through UN agencies and international aid groups, will provide a boost to efforts to ease the country’s humanitarian and economic crises. The Afghanistan Reconstruction Trust Fund has been frozen since August when the Taliban took control. Addressing the UN Security Council on Wednesday, the UN’s Special Representative for Afghanistan, Deborah Lyons, said aid efforts may have averted widespread hunger over the winter, but that urgent steps were needed to address restrictions on international payments and constraints on the central bank before Afghanistan’s economic collapse reached “a point of irreversibility”. Many refugees yet to receive COVID-19 vaccine. While on paper refugees in 162 states are now included in national COVID-19 vaccination plans, many refugees have yet to receive their first dose, according to new data from UNHCR. Although there has been significant progress on refugee inclusion, many refugees are hosted in developing countries where vaccine shortages and weak health systems have kept overall vaccination rates low. Refugees often face additional hurdles to getting vaccinated, including lack of identity documents and access to online registration systems. UNHCR noted that, where vaccines are being administered, rates are lower on average for refugees than for nationals. The agency called for more support to host countries to help them overcome access barriers and for states to address specific obstacles still faced by refugees.  As thousands of refugees from Ukraine cross the border into Poland every day, volunteers like Joanna have come out in force to help them, working alongside national authorities and humanitarian agencies in reception centres. Local residents have been dropping off donations of food, water, clothes, sleeping bags, shoes and nappies. “In the future, if I would need help like these people, I would like to also be remembered and get help,” said Joanna. Of 1.2 million people who have fled Ukraine since 24 February, 54 per cent (650,000) have arrived in Poland.
By Kristy Siegfried | 11 February, 2022 Displacement inside Myanmar doubles as conflict intensifies. UNHCR today said it was stepping up its emergency response to assist hundreds of thousands of internally displaced people in Myanmar as their number crossed the 800,000 mark – up from 370,000 since a military takeover in February 2021. Security is deteriorating rapidly across the country and more people are expected to be forced from their homes in the coming weeks and months, according to UNHCR. Of the 440,000 people newly displaced in the past year, more than half are from the south-east of the country, with Kayah and Kayin States the worst affected by fighting between various armed groups. Chin State in Myanmar’s north-west has also seen large-scale displacement. Although humanitarian access is restricted in many parts of the country, where local communities and charities have been playing a leading role in helping displaced people, UNHCR said its assistance had reached 170,000 people in nine states last year and that it planned to expand its presence in areas where new displacements are occurring in 2022. Hunger spreads in Horn of Africa as drought worsens. The Horn of Africa region is experiencing one of its worst droughts in recent history, UN agencies warned this week, with an estimated 13 million people in Ethiopia, Kenya and Somalia now facing severe hunger. Following three consecutive failed rainy seasons, families are taking desperate measures to survive, with thousands leaving their homes in search of food, water and pasture. The World Food Programme said such displacements were leading to increased tensions and conflict between communities. Forecasts of below-average rainfall threaten to worsen already dire conditions in the coming months. In Somalia, which has been hardest hit, people are moving to camps for displaced people on the outskirts of towns or making dangerous journeys across areas controlled by armed groups in search of work or humanitarian assistance. The UN is appealing for US$4.4 billion to provide life-saving assistance to about 29 million people in the three affected countries this year. Death of Venezuelan baby prompts calls for stronger protection measures. Trinidad and Tobago coast guard officers fired on a boat carrying people from Venezuela on Saturday night, wounding a mother and killing the baby in her arms, authorities said on Sunday. The shooting occurred as the officers attempted to intercept the boat after it entered the Caribbean nation’s territorial waters. In the absence of safer routes, many Venezuelan refugees and migrants resort to risky sea crossings. AFP reports that since 2018, more than 100 people have lost their lives in sinkings in the area between Venezuela and Trinidad and Tobago. In a joint statement on Monday, UNHCR, IOM and OHCHR called on States to establish safer pathways and stronger measures to protect the rights of people on the move. Construction of new asylum centre on Greek island sparks protests. Greek police detained at least four people on the island of Lesvos on Tuesday after violence broke out during a protest against plans to build a new reception centre for asylum-seekers. A peaceful march to the building site reportedly turned violent when a small group of protesters set fire to earth-moving machinery. The new EU-funded facility is due to be completed in September with a capacity to house up to 3,000 asylum-seekers. The Moria reception centre that previously housed asylum-seekers on Lesvos was destroyed by fire in September 2020. Since then, asylum-seekers have been staying at a temporary camp or have been moved to the mainland. The EU is funding the building of five new reception facilities on the Greek islands, three of which have already been completed on Samos, Kos and Leros islands, but they have been criticized by human rights groups for restrictions on freedom of movement. Locals have also opposed the building of new facilities. Cameroonian asylum-seekers deported from US subjected to abuse, report finds. Cameroonian asylum-seekers deported by the United States during the Trump administration suffered imprisonment, torture and rape on their return, according to a report released this week by Human Rights Watch. The deportations took place despite warnings from lawyers and human rights group that those being sent back would be in danger, and that their asylum claims were credible. The deportees had all fled Cameroon to escape armed conflict, violent confrontations and a government crackdown leading to a humanitarian crisis. The report found that almost all of those deported to Cameroon in 2019 and 2020 faced reprisals of some sort on their return, including imprisonment or detention. Others have reportedly been forced into hiding or have fled the country once more. Afghan evacuees in UAE protest delays in US relocation process. The Wall Street Journal reports that protests erupted late Wednesday night among thousands of Afghans over conditions at a facility in the United Arab Emirates where they are being housed. The Afghans were evacuated to the UAE on behalf of the United States and other Western countries following the withdrawal of foreign forces from Afghanistan and the Taliban’s return to power. The UAE agreed to provide the Afghans with temporary housing until they could travel onwards to third countries, but six months later many said they had received no news on their immigration cases. Beyond the UAE, thousands of Afghans are in a similar state of limbo in southeastern European countries such as Albania and Greece, and in other parts of the world, including Uganda, Mexico and Chile.  Disney’s latest animated film, Encanto, received three Oscar nominations this week, but the film has also sparked positive conversations about refugees and displaced people. The International Rescue Committee lists five ways it celebrates refugees, including by highlighting the unique contributions refugees bring to their new communities. Over 1.2 million people in Myanmar are now either internally displaced or stateless.
By Kristy Siegfried | 28 January, 2022 Burkina Faso coup prompts fears of further instability. Army officers demanding more support for their fight against armed groups announced on Monday that they had ousted Burkina Faso’s democratically-elected president, Roch Kaboré. While the military takeover prompted widespread international condemnation, it was greeted with significant support inside Burkina Faso, where civilians have been the primary victims of violence by armed groups and more than 1.5 million people have been displaced by the conflict. The coup is the fourth in a string of recent military takeovers in West and Central Africa, which could unleash further instability and insecurity in the region, according to analysts. AFP reports from Côte d’Ivoire, where thousands of people who fled across the border from southern Burkina Faso in recent months are living in a state of limbo that remains unresolved following the coup. Authorities estimate that more than 6,000 people abandoned their homes and fields in Burkina Faso after armed men arrived in their villages. Many of the refugees have relatives in Côte d’Ivoire, with families often living on both sides of the border. Although relations are good, host families are struggling to feed the new arrivals as more arrive every week. Shipwreck highlights rising numbers risking perilous sea routes to the US. A sole survivor was found clinging to an overturned vessel off Florida’s Atlantic coast on Tuesday. He told authorities he was one of 40 people who had set off from the Bahamas’ Bimini islands on Saturday night. By Thursday, when the US Coast Guard called off its search, five bodies had been recovered. The incident occurred as the Coast Guard and other authorities warned of a rising number of migrants and asylum seekers from countries including Haiti and Cuba making risky sea voyages to reach the United States. Experts told the New York Times that the increase was related to tougher border enforcement measures at the US-Mexico land border as well as political and economic instability, violence, and natural disasters in the Latin American and Caribbean countries where most of the people are coming from. In the 2021 fiscal year, around 3,200 people were apprehended trying to reach the US by sea, with 1,968 apprehensions on the Southern California coast, and the rest along the Florida coast. Smugglers typically overload small vessels and do not provide life jackets to people making the perilous voyage across the Florida Straits from the Bahamas. Afghanistan ‘hanging by a thread’ says UN chief. UN Secretary-General António Guterres urged nations on Wednesday to significantly boost humanitarian aid for millions of Afghans living in a “frozen hell”. He also urged countries to suspend rules and conditions that, since the Taliban took control last August, have frozen nearly US$9 billion in central bank assets and starved both the Afghan economy and lifesaving humanitarian operations of much-needed funds. AP reports that bitter winter cold is devastating the most vulnerable while aid organizations are scrambling to help people who lack either food or fuel. Roads in parts of the country are now deep in snow and passage for hundreds of trucks transporting food aid is slow going and difficult. Sky News reports that Afghans are resorting to desperate measures to feed themselves, including selling their kidneys and their children. Guterres warned that allowing the Afghan economy to completely collapse “could lead to a massive exodus of people fleeing the country”. Poland starts building metal wall at border with Belarus. Construction began this week on a 5.5-metre-high metal wall topped with barbed wire, and equipped with motion detectors and thermal cameras, that will run more than 180 kilometres along Poland’s border with Belarus, cutting through a protected forest. It is due to be completed in June at a cost of US$394 million. Thousands of migrants and asylum-seekers, many of them from Iraq, have attempted to cross from Belarus into Poland since last summer, with hundreds being pushed back by Polish border guards. At least 21 people have died or gone missing in the forested border area, according to IOM figures. Aid workers and rights groups worry that the wall will prevent people fleeing conflicts and persecution from being able to apply for asylum. Last year, Lithuania started building a wall on its frontier with Belarus. Drought threatens to displace over 1 million in Somalia. An intensifying drought in Somalia could displace as many as 1.4 million people over the next six months, IOM warned this week. Nearly 245,000 people have already abandoned their homes in search of food, water and pasture, mainly in the central and southern regions of the country. Voice of America reports that thousands have flocked to cities, particularly to the capital, Mogadishu, where they are living in makeshift shelters in cramped conditions with little or no assistance. Some have reportedly crossed into neighbouring Ethiopia. Extreme weather events like floods and drought have combined with a decades-long internal conflict to leave an estimated 2.9 million Somalis internally displaced. Drought conditions tend to create tensions over grazing areas and water sources that increase conflict and the number of people forced to move. Rights group accuses Egypt of forcibly returning Eritrean asylum seekers. Human Rights Watch said on Thursday that Egyptian authorities had deported 24 Eritrean asylum seekers, including children, on 24 December, without assessing their asylum claims or allowing them to register with UNHCR. UN human rights experts previously condemned the forced return of 15 Eritreans from Egypt in October and November last year, noting that Eritreans who fled their country were often detained after being returned, and then “tortured, held in extremely punitive conditions and disappeared”. HRW said it had documented the arbitrary detention of nine Eritrean asylum seekers in Egypt, without access to UNHCR or official asylum procedures, before they were deported with the group of 24 in late December. Others reportedly remain in detention. Some 21,000 Eritrean asylum seekers and refugees are registered with UNHCR in Egypt while there is no data on the number of unregistered Eritreans in the country.  Meet three sisters who are part of an all-girl basketball team at Mahama refugee camp in Rwanda. A Sport for Protection programme at the camp is supporting young people to fulfil their potential both in sports and in the classroom. “I play basketball because it can help me to make my dreams come true,” says one of the sisters. At sites for internally displaced people in north-west Syria, heavy snowfall in the past week has destroyed over 500 tents and damaged 9,200 more.
By Kristy Siegfried | 21 January, 2022 Refugees in Ethiopia’s Tigray cut off from food, water and medicines. UNHCR said its staff managed to reach two camps for Eritrean refugees in northern Ethiopia’s Tigray region this week for the first time since an air strike hit one of the camps on 5 January, killing three people. They found refugees “scared and struggling to get enough to eat, lacking medicine and with little or no access to clean water”, said UNHCR spokesperson, Boris Cheshirkov. Relief agencies have struggled to bring aid into the blockaded region for months, with the UN Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs (OCHA) noting on Thursday that humanitarian supplies had not reached Tigray since 14 December and that stocks of food aid and fuel were now “almost entirely exhausted”. Refugees at the two camps told UNHCR staff that more than 20 people had died over the past six weeks due to the worsening conditions and a lack of medicines. Without fuel for pumping or trucking water to the camps, the refugees have been forced to collect untreated water from streams that are rapidly drying out. UNHCR is calling for safe passage that would allow the 25,000 refugees to be relocated to a new site in neighbouring Amhara region as well as for access to allow humanitarian assistance to reach those in need. Displaced Syrians at risk as severe winter storm hits region. Heavy snowfall and record low temperatures hit Syria, Lebanon and Jordan this week, worsening the plight of thousands of Syrians displaced in the region. In Lebanon, an economic crisis has left an increasing number of Syrian and Lebanese families unable to afford fuel to heat their homes and shelters this winter. In Arsal, a mountainous area in the northeast of the country, many Syrian refugees live in flimsy tents with only blankets to keep them warm. In north and north-west Syria, tents in camps for internally displaced people were blanketed with snow and roads were blocked. CNN reports that three children died – one after a tent collapsed due to the accumulation of snow, and two when a fire caused by a heater broke out in their tent. As of Thursday, the UN’s Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs reported that 362 tents had been damaged and that there was an urgent need to unblock roads so that aid workers can access camps. Cyber-attack on ICRC exposes data of 515,000 vulnerable people. The International Committee of the Red Cross this week said a hacking attack on its data servers had compromised confidential information on more than half a million vulnerable people, “including those separated from their families due to conflict, migration and disaster”. The information came from at least 60 Red Cross and Red Crescent chapters around the world, while the breach targeted a contractor in Switzerland that stores data for the organization. There was no indication that the data had been publicly shared or leaked, or who might be behind the attack. ICRC’s director-general Robert Mardini appealed to the culprits to “do the right thing” and not “share, sell, leak or otherwise use this data”. The breach forced the organization to shut down its systems aimed at reuniting family members separated by conflict, disaster or migration. Two earthquakes strike Afghanistan. Two earthquakes struck a remote, mountainous area of western Afghanistan on Monday, killing at least 27 people and destroying hundreds of homes in Qadis district. Three days of heavy rainfall prior to the earthquake had left mud-brick houses vulnerable, said a spokesperson for the governor in Badghis Province, near the border with Turkmenistan. One resident told the New York Times that the death toll would likely rise, because many families were still buried under rubble. UNHCR said it was distributing tents, blankets and household items to affected households. Afghanistan is already in the grip of a humanitarian crisis with the economy in free fall and half the population facing acute hunger. A devastating drought has compounded the crisis with earthquake-hit Qadis one of the worst-affected areas. UK judge rules age assessments of asylum seekers unlawful. A high court judge in the UK ruled on Wednesday that the Home Office’s process for assessing the age of young asylum seekers when they arrive in the UK was unlawful. The case involved two teenage asylum seekers who were placed in adult immigration removal centres after their ages were wrongly assessed by social workers. The judge ruled that the policy of detaining young people for an age assessment immediately upon arrival was unlawful. The Independent reports that since September 2020, hundreds of unaccompanied young people arriving on UK shores have been detained by the government in a facility called the Kent Intake Unit for the purposes of carrying out “short” age assessments. Under the Nationality and Borders Bill, which is currently going through parliament, the Home Office would be able to use methods such as x-ray or dental analysis for assessing age. The accuracy of such methods has been questioned by various medical bodies. New EU asylum agency starts work. A new independent body, the European Union Agency for Asylum (EUAA), started work on Wednesday with what it called “a reinforced mandate” to support Member States in implementing consistent asylum practises across the bloc. EUAA is replacing the European Asylum Support Office (EASO), which has been operating since 2011 with a narrower mandate. Reception conditions, asylum procedures and rates of refugee recognition continue to vary widely across the EU, with countries struggling to agree on uniform practices and slow progress towards a Common European Asylum System. The new agency will have a Fundamental Rights Officer to safeguard the rights of asylum seekers, and a complaints mechanism. UNHCR’s Assistant High Commissioner for Protection Gillian Triggs welcomed the establishment of the new agency that can work with the EU “to ensure fair and fast asylum procedures”.  At a refugee camp in northern Cameroon, a group of Nigerian girls decided to form their own football team after boys in the camp refused to play with them. Last weekend, UNHCR bused the all-girl team to a stadium in Garoua, 200 kilometres away, to watch Nigeria compete in the Africa Cup of Nations. After cheering their national team to a win against Sudan, the girls were invited onto the pitch for a group photo. Nine of out of 10 Syrian refugees in Lebanon now live in extreme poverty, while half of the refugee population do not have enough food to eat.
By Kristy Siegfried | 14 January, 2022 UN seeks US$5 billion to prevent ‘catastrophe’ in Afghanistan. The UN on Tuesday asked international donors to provide more than US$5 billion in funding to stave off “a full-blown humanitarian catastrophe” in Afghanistan this year – its largest appeal ever for a single country. Five months after the Taliban took power, half the population are facing acute hunger, over 9 million people are displaced, and the economy is in free fall. If funded, the UN and partner organizations will deliver life-saving aid to 22 million people inside Afghanistan and support 5.7 million displaced Afghans and local communities in five neighbouring countries. UNHCR chief Filippo Grandi underscored the risk of further displacement both within the country and throughout the region if the international community fails to step up support. The appeal will be followed by a pledging conference in mid-March, but several countries announced new funding this week, including an additional US$308 million from the United States. On Thursday, UN Secretary General António Guterres appealed for a suspension of rules preventing the use of money in Afghanistan to save lives, and for a path to the conditional release of frozen Afghan foreign currency reserves. Air strikes in Ethiopia’s Tigray intensify. Drone strikes in several locations in Ethiopia’s northern Tigray region killed dozens of civilians over the past week. One strike reportedly killed 56 people in a centre for recently displaced people in north-western Tigray, near the Eritrean border. In another strike on Monday in the southern town of Mai Tsebri, 17 people working at a flour mill were killed, according to humanitarian workers who spoke to witnesses. The UN said it could not confirm casualty figures because access to Tigray is restricted and it remains under a communications blackout, but last week, UNHCR confirmed that three refugees were killed in an air strike on a refugee camp in northern Tigray. The attacks forced aid agencies to temporarily suspend their operations in the north-west, while fighting has rendered the main supply route into the region unusable since mid-December. A World Food Programme spokesperson warned that fuel and food supplies in Tigray are now “perilously low”, forcing the agency to scale down food distributions in a region where hundreds of thousands of people are facing famine-like conditions. Decade of Sahel conflict leaves 2.5 million displaced. UNHCR today called for “concerted international action” to end armed conflict in Africa’s Central Sahel region, which has forced more than 2.5 million people from their homes over the past decade. Internal displacement has increased tenfold since 2013, from 217,000 to 2.1 million by late 2021, while the region is host to 410,000 refugees. Violent attacks surged last year in all three Central Sahelian countries – Burkina Faso, Mali and Niger – displacing nearly 500,000 people by November. The insecurity, combined with the COVID-19 pandemic and the worsening effects of the climate crisis, have led to a rapidly deteriorating humanitarian situation in the region, according to UNHCR, which noted that host communities and government authorities with scant resources are buckling under the pressure of welcoming displaced families. Meanwhile, humanitarian agencies face mounting challenges to deliver assistance, including road attacks and insufficient funding. Last year, a third of UNHCR’s funding needs for the Central Sahel were unmet. The agency said it requires US$307 million to mount an effective response in 2022. Libyan security forces arrest hundreds of protesting migrants and refugees. Aid agencies estimate that some 600 migrants and refugees were arrested by Libyan authorities outside a former UNHCR-run community day centre and the agency’s main office in Tripoli early Monday. While some left as police arrived, others who refused to leave were moved to a detention centre. Those arrested had been camping outside the buildings seeking help and evacuation out of Libya, following a security operation in October that led to the arrest of thousands of migrants and asylum seekers and the demolition of many of their makeshift shelters. Protest leaders claimed the police had used excessive force during the arrests and Médecins Sans Frontières said its teams had treated patients taken afterwards to Ain Zara detention centre for stab wounds, beatings and trauma. UNHCR expressed concern about those held in detention and called for their immediate release. Fire tears through Rohingya refugee camp. A fire swept through a Rohingya refugee camp in southeastern Bangladesh on Sunday, destroying hundreds of homes. The blaze was the second in a week after a fire on 2 January severely damaged a COVID-19 treatment centre in another camp in Cox’s Bazar. Aid agencies said Sunday’s fire had burnt down 350 shelters, affecting nearly 2,000 people. Two learning centres for refugee children were also damaged, but there were no reports of casualties. A devastating fire last March killed at least 15 refugees and burned down more than 10,000 shelters. Fires are a continual hazard in the camps, where more than one million people live in extremely crowded conditions and shelters made of bamboo and tarpaulin are packed closely together. Sunday’s incident led to renewed calls for fencing that surrounds the camps to be removed. At least 200 killed in bandit attacks in northwest Nigeria. An estimated 200 people were killed and 10,000 displaced in attacks by armed bandits in the northwestern Nigerian state of Zamfara last week. The Guardian reports that following airstrikes by the Nigerian army on their hideouts, gunmen attacked villages in the Anka area for several days, firing on residents and burning homes. Those who fled sought safety in Anka town. Northwest Nigeria has seen a sharp rise in attacks on villages and schools and abductions since late 2020 as the government has struggled to maintain law and order. The bandit groups have emerged from a historical conflict between largely Fulani pastoralists and farmers of varying ethnic groups over access to water and land. Last week, the Nigerian government officially labelled them terrorists to bring tougher sanctions against those convicted, as well as their informants and supporters.  The Darrouba family from Syria made their way to Canada in 2016 via a resettlement programme. They told Calgary’s City News that now they want to return the support they received from Canadians by helping Afghan refugees arriving in the country. The “From Syria to Afghanistan” programme, launched by the Syrian Canadian Foundation, is linking Afghan refugees with 100 Syrians who will help them integrate into their new communities. Over half of the Central Sahel region’s internally displaced people (IDPs) are from Burkina Faso where the total number of IDPs reached more than 1.5 million by the end of 2021.
By Kristy Siegfried | 7 January, 2022 Three refugees killed by air strike in Ethiopia’s Tigray. Three Eritrean refugees, including two children, were killed by an air strike that hit a refugee camp in Ethiopia’s northern Tigray region, UNHCR said on Thursday. The strike on Wednesday hit Mai Aini camp and left four other refugees injured. While UNHCR is still trying to gather further information on the incident, aid agencies have noted an upsurge in air strikes since October which have killed at least 143 people in the Tigray region. UNHCR chief Filippo Grandi called on parties to the conflict that started in northern Ethiopia 14 months ago to respect the rights of all civilians, including refugees. “Refugees are not, and should never be a target,” he said. Fighting between government forces and the Tigray People’s Liberation Army in the north has left millions in desperate need of humanitarian assistance. Doctors in Tigray this week said patients were needlessly dying because of a de-facto blockade preventing medicines and other life-saving supplies from reaching hospitals. Harsh winter weather worsens humanitarian crisis in Afghanistan. Heavy snowfall and rain affected many areas of Afghanistan on Tuesday, blocking roads and causing avalanches and flooding in 30 out of 34 provinces, according to aid agencies. The UN warned that the harsh winter conditions are further aggravating the already severe conditions faced by many Afghans, particularly millions of internally displaced people. Speaking to NPR, Shelley Thakral, a spokesperson for the World Food Programme, said more than half the population are now facing extreme levels of hunger and malnutrition is soaring. She described a “new urban class of hungry people” who have lost their jobs and lack money for food or fuel to keep warm. UNHCR and the UN Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs (OCHA) will jointly launch a humanitarian response plan for inside Afghanistan in 2022 and a refugee response plan covering Afghan refugees and host communities in five neighbouring countries on 11 January. Mexico asylum applications surge in 2021. The number of people applying for asylum in Mexico nearly doubled between 2019 and 2021, reaching a record high of over 130,000 last year, according to the Mexican Commission for Refugee Assistance (COMAR). The main nationalities were Haitians and Hondurans, while the majority of claims were filed in the southern city of Tapachula, near the Guatemalan border. UNHCR has urged the government to consider granting legal migration pathways to ease pressure on overwhelmed COMAR officials in Tapachula where asylum-seekers have complained about long waits for their applications to be processed. Separately, the United States this week began returning asylum-seekers to the Mexican border city of Tijuana as part of its reinstatement of the Migrant Protection Protocols programme first put in place by President Trump. President Biden was winding down the programme until a US federal court order forced his administration to restart it late last year. Tennis star’s detention in Australia throws light on treatment of refugees. While Serbian tennis star Novak Djokovic awaits a court hearing on whether his coronavirus vaccination status prevents him from staying in Australia to compete in the Australian Open, he is being held in Melbourne’s Park Hotel – a facility used by the Australian Border Force to detain asylum-seekers and refugees. According to media reports, about 50 refugees are being held there currently, in conditions that have been denounced by human rights groups. The Guardian interviewed an Iranian refugee who has spent the past nine years in Australian immigration detention and is currently being held at the Park Hotel while he awaits resettlement to the United States. Attack on Syria’s Idlib leaves over 200,000 people without water. The start of the year saw an escalation of violence in the north-west of Syria that left two children dead and another four injured, according to UNICEF. An attack on Sunday damaged a UNICEF-supported water station, cutting off water supply to over 241,000 people in Idlib, many of whom are internally displaced. Reuters reports that makeshift camps housing thousands of displaced families near Jisr al Shuqhur, west of Idlib city had also been hit during a series of attacks at the weekend. The UN’s deputy regional humanitarian coordinator, Mark Cutts, noted that Syria is already facing a water crisis and called on attacks on civilians and civilian infrastructure to stop. Medics leave Poland-Belarus border without reaching migrants and refugees. International humanitarian group Médecins Sans Frontières (MSF) announced on Thursday that its emergency response team had left Poland after being blocked from accessing groups of migrants and refugees staying in a forested area near the border with Belarus. MSF said it had spent three months seeking permission to access the restricted area and provide medical and humanitarian assistance to people surviving in sub-zero temperatures, but without success. While hundreds of migrants and refugees are being sheltered in a logistics centre on the Belarus side of the border, a number of people are reported to still be living in harsh conditions along the border. Poland has imposed a state of emergency along its border with Belarus that prohibits all non-residents, including aid groups, from entering the area.  Afghan refugee and elite para swimmer Abbas Karimi has lived and trained in Fort Lauderdale, Florida since 2020. He told the South Florida Sun Sentinel how his coach, Marty Hendrick, made room for him in his own home during a COVID-related lockdown. Karimi has devised ways to swim the backstroke, breaststroke and his favourite – the butterfly. “That’s the hardest,” he told the Sun Sentinel. “That’s why I chose it … I like to do hard things. If it’s easy, I leave it for someone else.” In the first 11 months of 2021, more than 2,500 people died or went missing attempting to reach Europe via the Mediterranean or northwest African maritime routes. Another 31 people died in the Aegean Sea in three separate shipwrecks between 21 and 24 December.
By Kristy Siegfried | 17 December, 2021 Please note that this will be the final issue of The Refugee Brief this year. The first issue of 2022 will land in your in-box on 7 January. Displacement from water clashes in northern Cameroon reaches over 100,000. Clashes that erupted in Cameroon’s Far North region two weeks ago over dwindling water resources have now driven at least 100,000 people from their homes, triple the figure reported just a week ago, according to UNHCR. More than 85,000 people have fled into neighbouring Chad while another 15,000 have been displaced inside Cameroon. Deaths from the fighting have also doubled in the last week to 44, while 112 villages have been burned down. The root cause of the violent confrontations between herders and fisherman and farmers, according to UNHCR, is competition over increasingly scarce water resources exacerbated by the climate crisis. Over half the new arrivals to Chad have found refuge in or near the capital, N’Djamena, while others are scattered along the banks of the Logone River which marks the border. The new arrivals, most of them women and children, have put pressure on a country already hosting about one million refugees and internally displaced people. In a statement on Wednesday, Chad’s president, Mahamat Idriss Déby Itno referred to a “worrying situation” and called on the international community to “provide urgent assistance to these new refugees”. Rights groups report new wave of atrocities in Ethiopia’s Tigray. According to a joint report by Amnesty International and Human Rights Watch, security forces from Ethiopia’s Amhara region have stepped up mass detentions, forced expulsions and killings of ethnic Tigrayans in western Tigray. The report, which came out ahead of today’s UN special session on abuses committed during the year-long conflict in northern Ethiopia, is the latest in a series of accounts detailing atrocities against civilians committed by all parties in the conflict. The report alleges that Tigrayans have been expelled from several towns in western Tigray, where some 1.2 million people have been displaced since the conflict began, according to the UN. Others have been detained in what the two rights groups described as “life-threatening conditions”. According to the testimony of 31 people who spoke to Amnesty and HRW by phone, Tigrayans attempting to flee were attacked, and an unknown number killed. Fighting has displaced more than 2 million people across northern Ethiopia and driven hundreds of thousands into famine-like conditions. Afghans face challenges seeking refuge in neighbouring countries. While Pakistan and Iran have hosted the vast majority of Afghan refugees for decades, The Wall Street Journal reports that many more recent arrivals to Iran have been deported, including those attempting to claim asylum. Afghans without passports or visas usually enter Iran via desert smuggling routes in the province of Nimroz, but between August and December, nearly a half a million Afghans who entered Iran irregularly, later returned, about 360,000 after being deported. The LA Times reports that undocumented Afghans living in Iran for years are fearful of being caught up in a growing crackdown by Iranian authorities. Afghanistan’s borders with Pakistan and Iran are currently open only to those with passports and visas, and a small number of medical cases. The land borders of Tajikistan and Uzbekistan are completely closed to Afghans. Earlier this month, UNHCR expressed concern about the escalating risks faced by Afghans seeking to flee into neighbouring countries as the situation within the country continues to deteriorate. US commits to its first definition of statelessness. The United States this week pledged to adopt a formal definition for statelessness and to develop an official process for identifying and protecting people without a nationality living in the country. It said that the adoption of a standardized definition would ensure it can recognize the “unique barriers” encountered by stateless people. The Center for Migration Studies estimates that up to 218,000 US residents are potentially stateless or at risk of statelessness. UNHCR welcomed the commitment, which it said offers “real hope both in the United States and globally to stateless people who have been forced to live in the shadows and place their lives on hold simply because they have been deprived of a nationality.” Around the world, statelessness blights the lives of millions of people, who are frequently unable to travel, vote, access education and healthcare. Families of drowned refugees and migrants bid farewell at ceremony in France. French authorities this week said they had identified all 27 of the people who died trying to cross the English Channel by boat last month in the worst such disaster on record in the narrow seaway separating the two countries. Most of the victims were from Iraq, while others were from Afghanistan, Ethiopia, Somalia and Iran. They included seven women, a teenager and 7-year-old child. On Thursday, family members bade farewell to four Afghan men who died in the accident at a ceremony in the northern French city of Lille. Despite the sinking and winter weather conditions, migrants and refugees have continued to attempt the journey to the UK, including around 100 people who arrived to England’s south coast this morning. EU proposes new internal border controls. Under new rules proposed by the European Commission on Tuesday, Member States could introduce border checks within the Schengen travel zone during emergencies, initially for six months but potentially for up to two years. The New York Times reports that they would also be able to suspend some protections for asylum seekers if neighbouring countries orchestrate migratory flows to the bloc’s borders, as Belarus has been accused of doing in recent months. The proposed changes still need to be approved by national governments and the European Parliament. Critics said the new rules risked eroding fundamental rights, including the right to seek asylum.  Afro-Ecuadorians and Afro-Colombian refugees are using traditional arrullo rhythms and song to open a conversation about gender-based violence in the community of Calderón, in Ecuador. Olaise Cortéz and other members of Tía Gachita use music to reach out to people and raise awareness of women’s rights. “Sometimes, if you don’t know any different, you don’t change,” says Olaise. “But … we’ve learned about our rights. We pass this knowledge on to our neighbours, our brothers, to our children.” Afghans constitute one of the world’s largest refugee populations. Some three-quarters of them – more than 2.2 million – are registered in neighbouring Pakistan and Iran.
By Kristy Siegfried | 10 December, 2021 At least 53 migrants killed in southern Mexico road accident. The overturning of a truck crammed with over 100 migrants in the southern Mexican state of Chiapas on Thursday left at least 53 people dead and another 58 injured. Civil protection officials said the driver had been speeding when he lost control of the vehicle on the highway connecting the city of Chiapa de Corzo with the state capital Tuxtla Gutierrez. Prior to the crash, Mexican officials had stepped up transfers of mostly Central American migrants from southern Mexico to other regions of the country, but thousands remain in the city of Tapachula, close to the Guatemalan border, some living in makeshift shelters and overcrowded accommodation while they wait for their asylum cases to be processed. AP reports that Mexico’s refugee agency, COMAR, has been dealing with an unprecedented number of requests for humanitarian visas that have delayed the processing of asylum claims. According to COMAR, a record 123,000 asylum requests have been filed so far in 2021. UNHCR has called for alternatives to the asylum process to be made available to those people who do not qualify for refugee status but still need support. In the absence of such alternatives, said the agency, “people can often decide to take risks which can have fatal consequences”. 30,000 flee fighting between herders and farmers in northern Cameroon. A resurgence of tit-for-tat violence between herders, fishermen and farmers over scarce water resources has killed at least 22 people in Cameroon’s Far North region since Sunday and forced more than 30,000 people to flee into neighbouring Chad. Thousands of others have been displaced inside Cameroon. A traditional leader told Reuters the violence began when a herder wanted to bring his cattle to the banks of a river but was prevented by farmers and fishermen. Fighting later erupted in the city of Kousseri where the cattle market was destroyed and 10,000 people fled to Chad’s capital city N’djamena after crossing the Chari and Logone Rivers which mark the border. UNHCR said the climate crisis is worsening tensions in the region as water resources dwindle. A first outbreak of intercommunal violence occurred in August, displacing 23,000 people, 8,500 of whom have remained in Chad. UNHCR and authorities were leading reconciliation efforts in Kousseri this week when the violence broke out. EU countries agree to take in 40,000 Afghans. A group of 15 European Union Member States have agreed to take in 40,000 Afghans, European Commissioner for Home Affairs Ylva Johansson said after a meeting of interior ministers on Thursday. Some will arrive on evacuation or humanitarian admission programmes while some will be resettled as refugees. Germany will accept over half of the Afghans, with the Netherlands, Spain, France and other countries taking smaller numbers, according to media reports. UN High Commissioner for Refugees Filippo Grandi had previously urged the bloc to resettle 42,500 Afghans over five years, half of the 85,000 Afghan refugees UNHCR considers the most vulnerable. The agency has warned that an increasingly dire humanitarian situation inside Afghanistan may compel thousands more to flee the country. During the aftermath of the US military withdrawal and the return of the Taliban in August, EU States took in 28,000 evacuated Afghans. The United States is in the process of resettling another 60,000 evacuees and Canada has committed to welcoming 40,000 Afghans, while the UK has said it will resettle 20,000 over the coming years. Clashes displace thousands in Sudan’s Darfur. Nearly 10,000 people have fled a wave of intercommunal violence in the Jebel Moon area of Sudan’s West Darfur State, according to UNHCR which said over 2,000 of them had sought refuge in neighbouring Chad. AFP reports that the outbreak of violence, which began on 17 November, has killed around 100 people, including nearly 50 over the weekend in the Krink area, about 80 kilometres from the state capital, El Geneina. UNHCR said tensions remained high with its teams receiving reports from other parts of Darfur about the destruction of villages, sexual violence, and livestock rustling. The violence has also disrupted the farming season, raising further concerns about food security and a worsening humanitarian situation. The UN Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs said about 6.2 million people across Darfur – about half the population – would need humanitarian assistance next year. UK government’s immigration bill clears House of Commons. The Nationality and Borders Bill, which includes measures allowing UK border officials to turn back migrants at sea and to send asylum seekers to a third country while their claims are considered, was approved by the House of Commons on Wednesday. The Independent reports that more than 80 pages of amendments had been tabled, many of them by MPs concerned about the bill’s impact in its current form, but that all were voted down. Channel 4 reports on the far-reaching implications of the bill, particularly for asylum-seekers attempting to reach the UK via the Channel. If the bill becomes law, reaching the country in this way, rather than via so-called legal routes, will have an adverse effect on asylum claims. UNHCR’s representative in the UK, Rossella Pagliuchi-Lor, said it would prevent people from acquiring a status, even those found to be in need of international protection. The bill will now go to the House of Lords. UN refugee chief warns of world’s failure to address causes of displacement. Addressing the UN Security Council on Tuesday, UN High Commissioner for Refugees Filippo Grandi said the international community’s “failure and inaction” in responding to instability and insecurity had compelled humanitarian organizations to work in increasingly uncertain, and often highly politicized situations. He warned that humanitarians cannot replicate the role of States in finding political solutions and fixing economies in countries like Afghanistan, Yemen and Myanmar. Grandi also underlined the extent that the climate emergency has combined with the consequences of the COVID-19 pandemic and conflict to increase forced displacement in the Sahel and elsewhere. UNHCR is appealing for nearly US$9 billion to cover its operations in 136 countries and territories in 2022.  Ahmedou El-Bokhary leads a group of Malian refugees and local Mauritanians who battle bushfires in the area surrounding Mbera refugee camp, near Mauritania’s border with Mali. As the climate in Mauritania has become hotter, bushfires have become more frequent, threatening the pastureland the refugees and locals depend on to sustain their livestock. “We do it of our own free will,” says El-Bokhary, “because for us, someone who protects animals, protects their loved ones, and at the same time creates good relations between refugees and locals. We are proud of that.” There are now more than 6 million Venezuelans displaced outside their country, second only to the 6.7 million Syrians living in exile.
By Kristy Siegfried | 3 December, 2021 Millions of Afghans on the brink of famine. Nearly 23 million Afghans – over half the population – are facing extreme levels of hunger, and 8.7 million are at risk of famine, the UN World Food Programme warned on Thursday, as it urged the international community to put politics aside and step up support to avert a catastrophe. Afghanistan is being hit by multiple worsening crises including economic collapse, widespread displacement resulting from the country’s long-running conflict, as well as a drought and other climate-related emergencies. Briefing reporters on Friday, UNHCR spokesperson Babar Baloch said some 3.5 million forcibly displaced Afghans, including nearly 700,000 displaced this year, urgently need more support as winter sets in. Many lack proper shelter, warm clothes, fuel for heating or adequate food. AP reports that at Kabul’s Ataturk Children’s Hospital, the malnutrition ward is filled to capacity with acutely malnourished children and that many health facilities around the country have been forced to close due to the suspension of foreign aid since the Taliban took power in August. Earlier this week, UNHCR expressed concern about the escalating risks faced by Afghans attempting to flee into neighbouring countries as the situation at home deteriorates. With borders closed to the vast majority of Afghans, many are resorting to smugglers. Meanwhile, deportations of Afghans from Pakistan, Iran and Tajikistan have increased. US to restart programme requiring asylum-seekers to wait in Mexico. The Biden administration will restart a programme, begun by the previous administration, that requires asylum seekers to wait in Mexico for US immigration hearings, US and Mexican officials said on Thursday. President Joe Biden suspended the policy soon after his inauguration in January, but a federal judge ordered in August that it be reinstated. The administration said it had to wait for Mexico’s agreement before the policy could restart, including making “humanitarian improvements“. The US has agreed to conclude cases within six months of an individual’s return to Mexico and to improve access to legal assistance. Particularly vulnerable people, such as the elderly and those at risk of persecution in Mexico, will be excluded from the policy, which is due to restart next week. UNHCR said the announced adjustments to the programme do not address fundamental concerns over its impact on asylum seekers’ safety and right to due process. Its reinstatement comes as a public health order, known as Title 42, which allows border authorities to rapidly return asylum seekers, remains in use. EU proposes emergency measures at Belarus borders. The European Commission on Wednesday proposed an emergency asylum procedure that would allow authorities in Poland, Lithuania and Latvia more time to register and consider claims for asylum by migrants and refugees arriving from Belarus. Increasing numbers of people have been attempting to cross into the three countries from Belarus in recent months. If approved by the European Council, the amended rules would allow authorities up to 16 weeks to consider asylum requests, up from the standard four weeks. During that time, asylum seekers could be detained in closed centres. The emergency measures, which also include increasing the deadline for registering new asylum seekers from three days to four weeks, would last for a maximum of six months. UNHCR said any measures implemented under the proposal would need to meet international standards, including access to quality asylum procedures and legal assistance, and limiting the use of detention. ‘Bandit’ attacks force thousands of Nigerians to flee to Niger. Repeated attacks by criminal armed groups locally known as “bandits” forced more than 11,500 people in Nigeria’s Northwest to cross into neighbouring Niger last month, according to UNHCR. At least 43 people were killed during one attack by bandits on a town in Nigeria’s Sokoto State on 14 November, according to state government figures. UNHCR said the violence comes against a backdrop of intercommunal clashes between farmers and herders aggravated by the climate crisis, as competition increases for dwindling resources. Most of the November arrivals have taken shelter with local communities in 26 villages across Bangui in Niger’s Tahoua region, which was already hosting 3,500 Nigerian refugees. They shared stories of murder, kidnaping for ransom, arson and looting. Aid needs expected to surge in 2022 amid conflict, climate change and COVID. The UN warned on Thursday that the need for humanitarian aid was skyrocketing worldwide, as the coronavirus pandemic continues, and conflict and climate change push more people into poverty, displacement and food insecurity. An estimated 274 million people worldwide will need some form of humanitarian assistance next year, up from 235 million this year, which was already the highest figure in decades. The UN is appealing for a record US$41 billion to assist 183 million of the most vulnerable people in 63 countries, double the amount requested just four years ago. Its “Global Humanitarian Overview” for 2022 highlights soaring needs brought on by worsening instability in countries such as Afghanistan, Ethiopia and Myanmar, and protracted conflicts in Syria and Yemen. Pope Francis to highlight plight of refugees in Cyprus and Greece. The Pope arrived in Cyprus on Thursday at the start of a five-day trip that will also bring him to Greece, and the island of Lesvos, which he last visited in 2016. Cyprus has seen a rise in boat arrivals in recent years, with over 10,800 arrivals in the first 10 months of 2021, according to government figures. Francis will meet with refugees and migrants during his visit there and has reportedly arranged for 50 asylum seekers to be resettled from Cyprus to Italy. The New York Times reports that the Pontiff’s trip to Cyprus and Greece is expected to highlight issues such as the shutting of borders to asylum-seekers, particularly during the current phase of the COVID-19 pandemic, as well as the recent deaths of migrants and refugees in the Channel and the Mediterranean, which Francis described as a “huge cemetery” in a video message ahead of his trip.  Magartu Dedefi lost her sight when she was a toddler and fled Ethiopia to Kenya when she was just eight, but growing up with a disability in a refugee camp has not stopped her from working towards her goal of becoming a lawyer. After transferring from to a mainstream school in sixth grade, she is now among the top students in her class at age 16, and among the top learners with a disability in the country. Some 45 million people in 43 countries are currently at risk of famine.
By Kristy Siegfried | 26 November, 2021 Shipwreck in English Channel claims 27 lives. At least 27 people died on Wednesday, including a pregnant woman and three children, when their packed inflatable dinghy sank in the English Channel in the worst tragedy to date in one of the world’s busiest shipping lanes. Crossings by boat between France and the United Kingdom have tripled this year compared to 2020, with more than 25,700 people undertaking the journey since January. Hundreds of people live in precarious conditions along the French coast. Previously, many stowed away in trucks to reach the UK, but recent measures by French and British authorities have made this option more difficult. A statement from UNHCR noted that many of those in Calais and elsewhere along the coast come from conflict-affected countries and need access to international protection. UNHCR said a coordinated response was needed on both sides of the Channel to save lives at sea, provide dignified reception centres and to expand “safe and predictable routes to safety for refugees”. French President Emmanuel Macron and British Prime Minister Boris Johnson have both expressed horror at the tragedy and agreed to step up joint efforts to prevent the sea crossings but have also accused each other of not doing enough. Planned weekend talks between ministers from several EU States hosted by France that were to include UK Home Secretary Priti Patel are now slated to go ahead without her. Rising flood waters threaten camp for displaced in South Sudan. The Telegraph reports that a camp for internally displaced people in South Sudan is surrounded on all sides by rising flood waters. Mud dikes have so far kept the water back, but aid workers told the Telegraph that water levels have been rising daily and the dikes could soon be breached. Bentiu camp in South Sudan’s northern Unity State usually houses around 100,000 people displaced by conflict but the camp’s population has reportedly swelled to 120,000 as people have fled there from surrounded waterlogged areas. Across South Sudan, over 800,000 people have been affected by flooding which has hit eight out of 10 states since May. Unity State has been particularly hard hit with an estimated 32,000 people forced to flee their flooded villages now living in four makeshift camps in Bentiu town, according to Médecins Sans Frontières. Both MSF and UNICEF warned this week that the floodwaters were breeding grounds for outbreaks of waterborne and infectious diseases. Asylum seekers evacuated from Libya to Italy. A group of 93 asylum seekers who had been living in precarious conditions in Libya were evacuated to Italy on Thursday in the first such flight between the two countries in two years. The evacuees were the first of 500 who will be airlifted to Rome on UNHCR charter flights under a new mechanism which combines emergency evacuations with the humanitarian corridors that have been established in Italy since 2016. UNHCR said a total of five such flights would be organized over the course of one year. After their arrival in Italy, the evacuees will be able to apply for refugee status. Those flown out of Tripoli on Thursday included children, survivors of violence and torture, and people with serious medical conditions. Some had only recently been released from detention while others had been held in captivity by traffickers. Fighting intensifies in Yemen’s Marib. Some 40,000 people have been forced to flee Yemen’s central Marib governorate since September. UNHCR said it was gravely concerned about the safety of civilians in Marib, including more than one million people displaced there from other parts of Yemen since the start of the conflict. Fighting is moving closer to densely populated areas, endangering lives and access to humanitarian aid, according to UNHCR which said rocket strikes near sites hosting displaced people were causing fear and panic and forcing more people to flee their homes. Staff report that the sound of heavy fighting in the mountains surrounding Marib City can be heard day and night. A new UN Development Programme report released this week projected that by the end of 2021, Yemen’s war will have claimed 377,000 lives. Nearly 60 per cent of the deaths will have been caused by indirect impacts such as lack of safe drinking water, hunger and disease. Cambodian refugees jailed after being deported by Thailand. Three Cambodian refugees deported by Thailand have been jailed on charges of conspiracy and incitement, police said on Monday, as pressure grows on Thailand to protect activists at risk of persecution back home. Two of the refugees were returned earlier this month while a third was sent back to Cambodia on Saturday. All three were members of Cambodia’s disbanded opposition party. UNHCR said the deportations contravene “the principle of non-refoulement, which obliges States – including Thailand – not to expel or return people to a territory where their life or freedom would be threatened”. Al Jazeera reports that violence against political dissidents has surged in Cambodia with another activist slashed to death in Phnom Penh on Sunday. Dozens killed in clashes in Sudan’s Darfur. At least 43 people have been killed and 46 villages burned and looted during fighting between Arab nomads and farmers in the Jebel Moon area of Sudan’s western Darfur region. The fighting broke out on 17 November, according to the UN Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs, which said some 4,300 people have been displaced from the area with some fleeing to nearby villages and others crossing the border into Chad. The UN mission in Sudan (UNITAMS) said it had received reports of women and girls being raped during the violence and of 20 children missing. UNITAMS said clashes had also been reported in several areas of North Darfur. In January, violence in Darfur killed 470 people in one of the worst episodes since the conflict there in the 2000s.  Americans sat down to Thanksgiving celebrations with refugees and asylum seekers across the United States this week, among them Arizona Rabbi Shmuly Yanklowitz. He opened up his home in Scottsdale to newly arrived families from Afghanistan and Venezuela, calling the feast a “chance to hear their stories and more deeply connect with them and the needs they have, so we can be advocates for them at large.” One in five forcibly displaced women have experienced sexual violence.
